The idea of perfectionism is is
fear-based. And because it's fear-based,
we learn less. We learn slower. All of
that happens when we're in that binary
thinking and when we're in that false
end.
>> Perfectionism is predictive of all the
same negative health outcomes as stress.
>> The internal mind frame of being perfect
is extremely chaotic.
>> That if I was living right now the life
that I thought would be perfect for me,
it would be a miserable life for me now.
This week on the art of accomplishment,
we're talking about perfectionism. What
it is, where it comes from, and how it's
creating stagnation in your life, in our
lives, in organizations, and in society.
Over the past 30 years in Western
societies, perfectionism has increased
about 33%.
>> And it doesn't mean things have been
getting more perfect. It just means that
we've been getting a lot more anxiety,
depression, eating disorders. All of
these things are downstream of
perfectionism. Perfectionism is
apparently not preventative of these
things like you would think if you were
a perfectionist. It's actually a risk
factor
>> for all sorts of mental health outcomes
that we don't want.
>> Yeah.
>> So, what's what's going on there?
>> What is perfectionism?
>> It's a reaction to fear and to try
trying to control a situation and make
it so that it's less chaotic in them.
therefore creating the chaos. I mean,
obviously perfectionism is somebody
who's trying to get something perfect,
>> trying to get something exactly right.
And of course, right away there's an
issue with that, which is your mind says
you need to do it perfectly, but there's
actually your mind won't actually define
what perfect is.
>> So no matter what you do, it will always
not be perfect.
>> Let's just like back up for a second
before we just buy that whole sale. I
mean, there are certain things that like
>> need to happen in certain ways. For
example, the the James Web Space
Telescope, right?
>> Had to be done perfectly, had to be
launched perfectly, had to be built
perfectly, designed perfectly, deployed.
>> The telescope story is amazing and I
would love you to tell it. But the I am
very very confident if you would have
gotten another group of scientists
together to do that and it would have
and that it would have been successful,
the telescope would not look the same.
>> So multiple ways to do the same thing
here.
>> Yeah. So which one's perfect? So that's
the weird thing about perfectionism is
perfect. Seems like there is a idea of
there is one way to do it. And that's
what the mind tells us when we're doing
it. There's a way to do it where it will
be perfect. But there is not a way to do
anything that is perfect. And even
within whatever tolerance windows you
have, there's probably infinite ways to
do it. And this is what the mind forgets
in that moment because the mind is in
fear. Perfectionism is fear-based. And
just like all fear, it does two things
to the mind. One, it becomes binary.
There's a way to do it and there's
there's a right way to do it and a wrong
way to do it. That's part of how fear
works is that binary thinking. And then
the other thing that it does is it gives
you a false end. That telescope for
instance, if I recall correctly,
overbudget, not perfect, delays, not
perfect, all sorts of not perfect
things, right? And but it took time like
to get to the place where they it it it
hit inside of that window of tolerance
you were speaking about. And there was
like lots of iteration just
scientifically. Oh, let's try this. No,
that didn't work. Let's try this. It
didn't work. Let's try this. And it
didn't work. Right. And so if you were
trying to get every one of your
experiments perfectly and the data shows
this that you're like you're teams that
are trying to get things perfectly are
something like 30% or something like
that less productive than teams that are
are more interested in iteration or
excellence or or other stuff. So that so
it's just the idea of perfectionism is
is fear-based and because it's
fear-based we learn less we we we learn
slower. we don't get as good results.
All of that happens when we're in that
binary thinking and when we're in that
false end.
>> So that would explain why perfectionism
is predictive of all the same negative
health outcomes as stress.
>> Correct. Yeah.
>> Yeah. It is stress.
>> It is stress. A and it creates itself.
Meaning, so usually when you look at
people who have, this isn't all the
time, but usually when you look at
people who have a high perfectionism
tendency, it's it's their reaction to a
chaotic childhood,
>> right? And so and and so and it was
usually chaos that wasn't particularly
controllable. So it could look a couple
of ways. One of the ways that that could
look is alcoholic parent or mentally ill
parent and everything was chaotic. It
can also look like they were criticized
but not for a consistent reason, right?
It's like it wasn't criticized because
your hair wasn't perfect. It was
>> well, I did exactly what you wanted with
my hair, but I'm still getting
criticized, right? So, it's just like
this. It's because the parent feels bad
about themselves and the way they're
handling it is criticizing the kid. It
has nothing to do with the kid. So, this
is the reaction to to not wanting to
feel out of control. And if you think
about it in a golden algorithm
perspective, which is the thing that we
want to the feeling that we are trying
to avoid, we invite in the exact way
that we're trying to avoid it.
>> Perfectionism is trying to control
something, not to not feel that out of
control feeling. And the way we do it is
to try to get it exactly right. And
trying to get it exactly right creates
all sorts of chaos. For instance, just
we've already talked about this. If you
are a team that's in the perfectionist
team, then that team is going to be less
successful than the non-perfectionist
team, which is more chaos.
>> You're not producing. You're not meeting
your goals. You're not doing it well
enough. You feel more overwhelmed,
right? Because you're setting up a
situation in your mind the same way that
you was set up in in your household,
which is
you can't get it right. Perfection. You
can't get it perfect. So, you can't get
it right. So that in itself is is like a
certain amount of chaos. Trying to get
something that you can't get is is
right that creates chaos. The other
thing that creates chaos is that when a
human being is trying to get something
perfect, they usually are trying to get
everything about the thing perfect,
which is a very ineffective way of
getting something right. So, what I mean
to say is
>> if I'm going to do something um in
marketing, I'm going to I'm going to go
to like three or four principles. If I'm
going to run a company, I'm going to go
three, four, or five principles. And
what those principles are are things
that I know that if I get them right,
everything else is going to work out in
in the wash.
>> Everything else is going to fall out of
that. So if I know for instance that I
feel deeply connected with my customer,
I know that my product is going to be a
lot better, that they're going to feel
like we care about them. It's going to
be better customer service. So I focus
on how do we create connection with the
customer.
If you're trying to get it perfect,
perfect customer service, you've lost
track of the fact that connection is
actually the main thing. You're
thinking, did I say the exact right
thing on the phone call? Did do I have
the perfect script for all the people to
talk to all the customers? What are the
you know like what's the voice quality
of my customer service people? How
what's the response time? Blah blah blah
blah. And you can't get it all right and
then you've lost track of the really
important thing.
>> Right.
>> Right. Trying to have the perfect
marriage. This is a great example of it.
Trying to have the perfect marriage
>> like never works.
If you just go into any house where
someone's like trying to have the
perfect marriage, it's just freaking
hell. It's Allen there. And
>> that's the beginning of many drama
shows, movies.
>> Exactly. Right. So, so because you've
lost track of the most important thing,
which is love. Like, who cares what the
house looks like if you've got love?
>> Yeah. So, from that perspective, it
sounds like perfectionism is simply
overfocusing on not the highest leverage
point. Like for example, like you're
talking about like if we walk in and we
facilitate a team and I'm worried about
getting the words right and I'm worried
about like did we hit all the points on
did I say all the little bullet points
to the to the exercise that's not going
to result in the same outcome as if we
if I'm paying attention to what's
happening for people and I'm really
feeling what's going on in the room and
tracking what people what's what's the
emotional arc that people are on.
>> Yeah. Yeah. So, for instance, like when
I'm doing coaching videos, I'm focused
on is my heart open? Am I following
them?
Am I'm making sure I'm not trying to get
them anywhere. If I do those three
things, everything else works out.
>> Mhm.
>> Everything else becomes automatic. And
yes, I improve as a coach over time and
all those little things improve. But
because I am not trying to get it
perfect and I'm focused on those three
things, I actually get to iterate more,
which actually gets me to higher and
higher windows of tolerance over time.
>> So you're you're following something.
There's something you're following just
like building a telescope. There's laws
of physics and there's principles of
design that you follow. You've learned
like these have been developed over Yes.
a very long period of time and people
use them. principles of
>> and you can't find them if you're into
perfectionism.
>> Yeah.
>> You can't find them because you're
trying to get everything right. And then
the other piece about it is that you
lose track of context. On one level, the
context, you can't see the forest
through the trees. You can't see the
three things that you have to pay
attention to to actually have the best
effect. But the other thing is you're
not looking around at the wider context
because you're so focused on the context
you're focused on. So, if I'm completely
focused on getting the email correct,
I'm not thinking about when the best
time to send the email is. If I'm trying
to figure out the perfect time to like
the perfect system for emails about
timing and getting the wording correct
and doing all that stuff, then I'm not
thinking about, oh, what is the emails,
what's the result in the company that I
want from the email. And if I'm not if
I'm focused on that, there's always a
bigger context that you're also missing
if you're into perfectionism because
because fear like when you think about
your visual field under fear, it
narrows. It gets very constrained. It's
binary again. It has a false end again.
You're constraining reality into this
very tight box and and therefore you're
not able to actually do the best work.
>> Yeah. And come coming to think of that
constraint, even if you complete
perfectly the plan that you laid out, y
>> it's still a limited plan. It's still
the only
>> it's still the plan that you could come
up with with the consciousness that you
had when you started, not the
consciousness that's evolving throughout
the process through experience and
innovation.
>> That's a great point. Yeah. Yeah. But
what you're what I hear you're saying is
that doing any project is a learning
process. And if you're getting if you're
trying to make it perfect, then there's
the assumption that you already know
what the end state is, which means you
can't learn.
>> And if if I was living right now the
life that I thought would be perfect for
me at 39 when I was 18, it would be a
miserable life for me now.
>> Totally. Right.
>> I could I could hit all those strokes.
>> Yeah.
>> All those brush strokes and it wouldn't
>> it would feel constraining. if you'll
>> yeah perfectionism and evolution are an
interesting thing because on one level
it doesn't square meaning
there's nothing perfect in evolution
everything's constantly evolving and so
that like how do you even define
perfectionism in it and yet there's some
way in which those chaotic systems like
evolution like life on earth there's a
perspective where it's like unbelievably
perfect more perfect than anything
>> and ordered
>> yeah it's almost as though what we see
as chaos from our human perspective from
whatever limited perspective we have is
simply an ignorance of
whatever broader context that there
actually is the the actual underlying
dynamics that we're not able to
perceive. There's a book I read a while
back called Seeing Like a State. And it
talks about how when colonizers came to
Africa and they were trying to figure
out how to produce yields for the
resources that they were trying to grow.
They saw the way that locals were
growing plants and growing crops. And to
them it looked like chaos because you've
got like the beans mixed with the
whatever mixed with and it just
>> I think it's actually beans, squashes,
and corn.
>> Yeah.
>> In in the Hopi reservation it's those
three things were planted together.
Yeah. Yeah.
>> Yeah. Yeah. So there's certain things
that are they didn't see that there are
certain things that are planted together
in certain ways that might look quite
disordered from a very sharp right
angled boxy kind of logical mindset,
>> right? but actually were really
following the highly complex order of
nature that had been discovered over
many many generations of
>> really paying attention and attuning to
the land which bringing this back to
perfectionism as a fear response.
>> Yeah.
>> If you if you were to assume
>> that everything that you're looking at
including your unfinished project or
your unstarted project your blank page
>> Yeah. and you see it as perfection and
you ask how do I connect with this
that's a very different thing from
>> right yeah yeah yeah yeah
>> how do I impose my idea of perfection on
this
>> I think that goes into that really
deeply that the one of the solutions for
perfectionism is to
take a different perspective and say oh
is how is my appro it's not how do I get
it perfect it's how do I change my
approach
>> so that approach can be connection I I
think is what I find to be the most
effective. The approach can also be say
excellence which means how do I just
constantly improve or which means how do
I do my best work or um the the the
change can be oh what's the process
what's the process I would enjoy what's
the process that I think will get us to
the conclusion the best. Any of those
things work a lot better than
perfectionism because you're seeing it
you're seeing a broader context in it.
seeing like the the how you get from one
place to another rather than I know what
this is supposed to look like and now my
job is to try to make it look which is
by the way extremely [__] arrogant,
>> right? It's really arrogant to think
that you know what perfection is.
It's extremely arrogant to think you can
get to perfection. It's extremely
arrogant to to assume that your idea of
perfection is actually what matters to
other people or is right. So the whole
the whole thought process of perfection
is just full of holes.
>> Yeah.
>> It's just like that it doesn't exist.
>> Okay. So there's there's the thought
process. We've been talking about the
perfectionist mindset and then there's
something that's kind of coming out here
like the excellence orientation, the
orientation towards iteration and
learning. Yeah.
>> And that's talked about a lot in Silicon
Valley for example. There's this like
fail fast concept. But what I noticed is
that in in leaders and founders, it's
not just
>> adopting a new mindset.
>> It's not as simple as that. It's
something much deeper. And so I want to
get
>> closer to the to the emotional component
here. They're talking about the fear and
they're talking about the the childhood
circumstances that create the
perfectionism.
>> So, how does somebody go from
perfectionism to in what we might call
an excellence orientation
>> emotionally? How what what is the
emotional journey
>> to get through get through that
perfectionism into into connection with
what they're doing? often times there's
some removal of love, criticism, attack
or something like that which people are
trying to avoid. The chaotic system that
they're trying to avoid is what is the
fear that creates the perfectionism.
Obviously, the first step is to see that
that that chaos is internal. Like the
the internal mind frame of being perfect
is extremely chaotic.
Like if you just listen to your internal
>> Oh yeah.
>> voice.
>> Yeah. It's a loud screaming.
No. No. That's exactly right.
>> You're basically living in the way that
everything is wrong rather than
>> Yeah.
>> seeing how it's right.
>> Incredibly chaotic internally. And so
the first thing is to is to see what
it's like to not have that internal
relationship with yourself. And we can't
go into that. I mean that we go into
that forever, but there's a voice in the
head podcast that people can go to that
would be helpful for that. And then
>> um so that's a big thing that moving
fear and we have the fear podcast around
that that would be really helpful is
like having somebody actually feel the
fear and be present with the fear
whether it's through emotional inquiry
or whether it's through the expression
of that fear through shaking. moving
that fear is going to be a really
healthy thing for them to do to get to
the other side of perfectionism.
Intellectually, it's really doing what
we're doing at the beginning of the
episode is to see through that the idea
that there like
>> the the mind says be perfect, but that
it can't define perfect. And if you get
to perfect, if you get to the thing that
the mind said was perfect, the mind
changes the goalpost
because the mind is setting up that
chaos for you. And so it's going to
change the goal. And so to see that to
see that like, oh, I got to get this
perfect gets replaced with
there's no such thing as perfect. I
can't get it perfect. This is a setup.
This is a trap.
>> It's going to make me less effective.
I'm going to learn slower. If you know
all that stuff, then the mind can't
really like attach to the idea of
perfect, which is really important on
the gut level. I think it's really
important to understand that you're
under attack. And so that's another way
in which that golden algorithm works
which is I'm under attack by myself. I
perceive a threat from the outside
world. And I I know there's some data on
like the threat that that it's a like we
in the brain perfectionism is like a
threat.
>> Activates the threat networks activates
the amydala.
>> Exactly. Turns off creative problem
solving. Exactly. Prefrontal cortex.
Yeah.
>> And so to and so that threat is a gut
thing. It's a nervous system thing. And
it is to and it's like how do I react
when that when I feel that threat cuz if
I if I react to it as if it's a threat
then I'm going to make a threat in the
world. Meaning if I treat you like a
threat enough you will act like a threat
right? So the way I would say that this
works is say in a in a a business I'm
scared of your response as my boss. I'm
going to treat you like a threat. Oh my
gosh. And pretty soon you're gonna be
really [__] frustrated with me and
you're gonna act like a threat.
>> Like I I want connection. I want
performance. I want us to be able to
work together. I want all these things
as your boss. I'm not getting any of
them. I'm getting like fear, stagnation,
freeze. I'm getting
you trying to be perfect instead of
actually like get the job done
and then I act like a threat. And so
that's another way the golden algorithm
works. But it's just generally when we
treat the world as a threat, eventually
it acts like a threat back.
>> Yeah. Yeah. Well, something just
happened to me in my perspective a
moment ago is I was thinking about the
space telescope and how long it took and
the delays. I'm like, oh, how much of
the delays were actually because of
people being afraid of the love being
removed or people like not knowing right
like who's in charge? Am I going to be
intact? What's
>> So
both both sides can be true.
>> Almost always. Yeah, that's right. Both
sides. So that's so that's so moving the
fear, expressing the fear, working with
the internal critic,
>> all that you can find on other podcasts.
Um, really useful on the on the threat
thing. It's like, oh, you can feel that
threat and actually stop and be with it,
be present with it, and not react from
it.
>> What does that look like to feel it, be
with it, not react from it?
>> What happens is it's like there's a
pulse of nervous system reaction, fear.
Oh my god. Okay.
>> And instead of taking an action,
just sit with it. Let go.
>> Adjust to what's happening here in this
moment right now.
>> Sounds like a perfectionist kryptonite
move.
>> It's like where are you now? Because
like any trauma,
uh, it puts us into a past situation
back to our parents, back to whatever
Fallujah when you're in Cleveland. like
it it just it puts you back into a state
that isn't true. And so if you're
actually present in that moment rather
than reactive in that moment,
>> then you're actually present with what's
actually happening now, which is, oh, I
have a boss who wants a job done.
Doesn't mean they want it perfect. Just
today, we were on a call and somebody's
like, oh, I'm not going to get this
perfect. And Matia, CEO, was like, you
know, we're in this together. We're
doing this as a team. This isn't all on
you. We, you know, you just totally
relaxed the person on the call because
all of a sudden they're not at threat.
>> Yeah.
>> And the perfectionism let go.
>> And now considering the being being with
the threat, the being present with it.
There's something that often happens
when someone's present with a feeling
which is kind of go all the way back to
the feeling like to where it came from
and the story of the feeling. So like
being present with a feeling I'm hearing
isn't isn't just
>> oh I feel unsafe and I'm unsafe and just
fully buying that because that's going
to the past. Being present is
>> my body is feeling these sensations of
unsafety and it
>> is interpreting the world in this way
but what I'm actually also perceiving
right now here in this moment
>> yes
>> is well what am I perceiving am I
actually in danger am I actually safe
what is
>> what is the difference between what I'm
what my gut is predicting
>> and what I'm experiencing
>> both are really useful u meaning like in
a day-to-day meetings and situations
just being present with it. Super
useful. There is a really important
thing to going back into the past,
feeling through the emotions that you
weren't allowed to feel
>> when you were in that chaos, right? Like
your job is like, "Oh, you're a kid.
There's chaos. How do I
be safe? I'm going to control, you know,
and yeah,
>> I'm going to get it just right. I'm
going to be perfect. I'm going to do
this thing." And then they can't get mad
at me, which never worked. But that
means you didn't get to feel a whole
bunch of stuff like the fear of the
chaos like the maybe the anger or
whatever. So I think it is important to
go back into the trauma and find find
great people to do that with. Obviously
doing it alone is not a great idea but
but that's
>> I mean that that puts your perfectionism
into into context. You were talking
about how perfectionism is like a loss
of context.
>> Yes. And so if you go back, if you want
to work through your perfectionism,
>> then go back to the full context from
which your perfectionism emerged as a
pattern.
>> Yeah.
>> And see that more clearly.
>> Exactly. That's right. And
>> so one of the things that you might
notice about our business, I I hope you
notice it, but people get more and more
productive the more they stay here.
>> And the reason that that's the case is
because we fight perfectionism
organizationally. So what I noticed over
time is that bigger, more bureaucratic
the organization gets, the more fear
that your boss is going to fire you,
that something's not going to be right,
that I have to do it perfectly, that
what's Joe going to think, what's Steve
Jobs going to think? And in that fear
becomes more and more perfectionism,
which kills innovation, as the studies
show,
>> decreases results, as the studies show.
And so the only cure for that is to take
the fear out of the organization, right?
And so that's why it's so important to
like celebrate mistakes like we do. We
literally give standing ovations to
people who make mistakes, right? Like
>> everything we do is oh everything's an
iteration because we really want people
to take experiments. We expect people to
do experiments that will fail. like it's
built into our whole system to say, "Oh,
your job is to fail at times. Your job
is to try things. Your job is to
like mess up, not be perfect." And so
that's why I think we get so much that's
why when people come here, they become
more productive. And the crazy thing is
now kind of hanging out in some of the
other organizations that I hang out in,
what I notice is it's usually just the
opposite.
Most organizations people become less
productive when they are in the
organization and it's because that fear
goes up and that perfectionism goes up.
>> It's more that there's there was
somewhere for the fear to go.
>> Oh, it's like the fear was able to move
and be loved. And the opposite situation
that you're talking about is that the
fear has nowhere to go. The fear has to
be held inside and held alone or work
its way out through gossip and politics.
Yeah, that's really well really well
seen. Yeah, that's right.
>> So, it's like if there's nowhere for the
fear to go, you're just going to have
fear driving all the decisions. You're
fear driving all the processes. You're
going to have fear stagnating and
narrowing the vision
>> and killing the innovation and the
creativity.
>> And I see that like all the time. I see,
oh my gosh, being inside of
organizations like here's the idea, it's
a good idea. And then somebody needs to
not get in trouble and they'll take the
key component out of the idea, the thing
that's actually going to give it
leverage.
>> Mhm.
>> Because they're into perfectionism and
they can't see the forest through the
trees. They can't see the actual one or
two things that are going to make it
right. And then you can say, oh, how
have we lived our life
>> from the last 50 years? So 19, what is
that 8575 to today? 75 till today. like
doesn't cars would look different,
houses look maybe a little different. We
have cell phones, you know,
>> things are changing, but not at that
same kind of clip. And I and and our
society has become less and less
riskoriented and more and more per you
said earlier 30% more perfectionism.
It's like, oh, right, that's less risk
aversion. It's like that's trying to get
it right instead of like, oh, I'm going
to fail. And and that's that's the
underlying cause. And the amazing thing
is if you look at it on a societal level
and this happens for businesses too when
people are scared that they're not
progressing often times what they do is
they put more fear into the system
instead of less fear into the system
>> right oh we need society to improve we
need it to grow so I'm going to start
creating things that produce more fear
rather than things that reward risk
which is fascinating because over this
over that same period of time our
technology has increased exponenti
entially the so many aspects of our
economy and production have increased
exponentially and yet it seems like that
just creates a whole bunch of back
pressure between the increased
perfectionism and stagnation of the way
that we actually organize as a society
and then the increased like pressure of
the changes that are occurring at an
increasing clip especially now with AI
and all the geopolitics going on
>> and of course you just have this backlog
of fear that has nowhere to And boom,
here we are.
>> Not to make this about geopolitics, but
>> yeah, that's right.
>> But this is this is something that's not
just in a company, it's our society
right now,
>> right? And and what I noticed is that
typically
in the long haul of society, like in an
80-year period or something like that,
but also in a a company, what happens is
you keep on pre like one person gets
hurt, so you make a rule to prevent the
risk. One person gets offended, so you
make the rule to prevent the risk. keep
on making more and more rules. And
there's this great thing that says, I
think this is true for companies, but
it's also true for societies, which is
at the beginning of an empire, there's
few rules and everybody obeys them. At
the end of an empire, there's a ton of
rules and nobody obeys them. And that's
true with companies. And so these more
of these rules start getting populated
as a way to stay safe, as a way to
mitigate risk, as a way to make sure
people don't get hurt, which seems like
such a caring, compassionate thing to
do, but it's it's it's it's aiming for
perfectionism,
>> right?
>> And so what it actually does in a
company, in a society, is it per it's
creates stagnation. And so there is a a
way that we are sacrificing
the whole for the individual.
>> Yeah. In a way that like utopia is an
idea that has hurt possibly the most
people.
>> Right. Right. Exactly.
>> Yeah. And I know we were kind of geeking
out on geopolitics, but the more
important for me, the more important
part of that is that's business as well.
And so if you look at uh the guy whose
name escapes me right now uh Netflix and
Netscape before he talks about how he
induces it creates a certain amount of
chaos in the system because he smart
people leave if you make a company idiot
proof and then when the real changes
come they can't actually handle
the the innovation they can't really hap
they can't change quick enough and so he
makes sure there's a certain amount of
chaos so that there can be change
and that's what he accredits
>> going from shipping DVDs to online
streaming to probably now gaming or
whatever it is that he's doing. And so
so that there's like there's an
intelligence to that to say, "Oh, no.
I'm going to create I'm going to make
sure there's a certain amount of chaos
here that it's not going to be all
systematized."
>> Yeah. And then there's there's also the
forces feeding that in business, in
education, and in families, and in like
the moment you have a kid, everyone
tells you the perfect way to raise your
kid. You know, there's
>> it it goes all the way down through the
levels into the the deeply personal and
familial,
>> right? Yeah. Exactly. Yeah. You can
create you can have that same fear with
your kids and you make less resilient,
less
>> capable kids. Exactly. Right. Yeah. And
but it's all perfectionism. It's all,
oh, we're going to make this whole
system perfect so that nothing bad can
happen. Yeah.
>> So that we can't create chaos so there's
no chaos. And then what it does is it
evokes these big explosions of chaos
like
>> a company failing or going away
overnight or very quickly or whatever,
>> right? Which which you see over the
course of someone's life with the
perfectionism pattern often, especially
like right there in midlife when they've
built the perfect life.
>> Yeah. And then
>> and then they feel trapped in it and
then boom. chaos. Exactly.
>> So, how does somebody who's listening to
this
>> kind of titrate that process uh allow
some of that fear to see the light of
day in a way that isn't going to disrupt
their life too much and maybe some way
that they can handle constructively?
>> And the the the most effective is the
emotional inquiry. That's a really great
way to just learn to sit with the fear
that's underneath it to identify, oh,
I'm in perfectionism. Trying to be
perfect isn't going to solve the
problem. Being with the fear is what's
going to solve the problem.
>> I'm gonna be with the fear. Emotional
inquiry is a great way to do it. It's it
does it doesn't have to be any more
complicated than that.
>> Also, just like really looking at your
threats, like going past the end point
that your fear says there is and and
allowing yourself to feel everything
that that might be. So, typically
what happens is I need to make it
perfect because of X. I'll get love
removed. I'll get in trouble. I'll get
fired. whatever it is to actually
visualize and feel through that
experience of okay, now I've gotten
fired and what's going to happen next?
What's the next iteration?
>> To feel all of that stuff is what
prevents you from
from uh being scared of it
>> because I've already lived it. I already
know what it is. I know I can get to the
other side of it. I can see through the
false end. And as as we talk about all
the time on the show that what we're
we're not avoiding circumstances, we're
avoiding emotions. Like, okay, if you
got fired and you were like, "Yay, I got
fired. This is the best thing ever." And
you knew you were going to get the best
job and then you were the happiest ever
you've ever been. You wouldn't worry
about being fired.
>> Yeah.
>> You're worried about
feeling like crap. Like feeling so
depressed about it that you can't get
another job. Feeling feeling feeling is
the thing that you're really scared of.
So to go through a visualization where
you actually can feel it.
>> Yeah. And unless you're avoiding the
pleasure.
>> One of the most chaotic experiences for
perfectionists is is pleasure and joy
>> because
usually in a household where a
perfectionist is born, their pleasure
and joy got kicked.
And so it's a very like, oh my gosh, I'm
feeling really good. What's about to
happen? I'm gonna get it. I'm gonna get
it.
>> Got to get back to just doing things
right. So I'm
>> Exactly. So yes, that that deep
experience of pleasure and joy is
something that oftent times they will s
self-sabotage unconsciously
because the feeling of it is so freaking
intense.
>> So how much of perfectionism and
creating art for example is simply the
avoidance of the sheer pleasure of
feeling free in it? Usually people have
to invite the fear, invite the anger,
invite the grief and then they can start
inviting the pleasure. But if you want
to get a head start on it than you do
when we talk about enjoying the process,
it's if you can or connect with the
process, right? If I can instead of
doing this process perfectly, I can
deeply connect with it. If I instead of
doing this process perfectly, how do I
enjoy this process the most? that starts
to unravel all the negative and that
very positive emotional experience that
we're unconsciously avoiding.
>> This was a excellent
>> excellent not perfect podcast. I can
tell you all the ways it wasn't perfect
and yet steer here we are very very
happy with it.
>> Thank you Joe.
>> Yeah, what a pleasure.
>> Thanks everybody for listening to the
art of accomplishment. If you like this
episode and you find somebody in your
life who you think would enjoy it,
please send it along. Also remember to
like, subscribe, give us a star rating.
We'd love that. This podcast is hosted
by Joe Hudson and myself, Brett Kistler.
It is produced by Mi Kelly, and this
episode was edited by a reasonable
volume.